# Bellabeat Capstone Case Study

### How Can a Wellness Technology Company Play It Smart?

## Introduction

Welcome to the Bellabeat data analysis case study! In this case study, I will perform real-world tasks of a data analyst.
I will be working for Bellabeat, a high-tech manufacturer of health-focused products for women, and meet different characters and team members.And In order to answer the key business questions, I will follow the steps of the data analysis process: ask, prepare, process, analyze, share, and act.

## About the Company Bellabeat

Urška Sršen and Sando Mur founded Bellabeat, a high-tech company that manufactures health-focused smart products.
Sršen used her background as an artist to develop beautifully designed technology that informs and inspires women around
the world. Collecting data on activity, sleep, stress, and reproductive health has allowed Bellabeat to empower women with
knowledge about their own health and habits. Since it was founded in 2013, Bellabeat has grown rapidly and quickly positioned itself as a tech-driven wellness company for women.
Bellabeat is a successful small company, but they have the potential to become a larger player in the global smart device market.

## Scenario of the Study

in this study, i will focus on one of Bellabeat’s products and analyze smart device data to gain insight into how consumers are using their smart devices. The insights will then help guide marketing strategy for the company.
my analysis and recommendations will be presented to the Bellabeat executive team for strategic decision making.

## Ask Phase

Sršen asks me to analyze smart device usage data in order to gain insight into how consumers use non-Bellabeat smart
devices. She then wants you to select one Bellabeat product to apply these insights to in my presentation. These questions will guide my analysis;

1. What are some trends in smart device usage?
2. How could these trends apply to Bellabeat customers?
3. How could these trends help influence Bellabeat marketing strategy?

I will produce a report with the following deliverables:

1. A clear summary of the business task
2. A description of all data sources used
3. Documentation of any cleaning or manipulation of data
4. A summary of your analysis
5. Supporting visualizations and key findings
6. Your top high-level content recommendations based on your analysis

### Key Task


1.  **Identify the business task;** the company need to better target their marketing efforts into their customer's needs based on their usage of their fitness smart devices. And then, make high-level recommendations for how these trends can inform Bellabeat marketing strategy.

2. **Consider key stakeholders;** The main stakeholders are Urška Sršen, Bellabeat’s co-founder and Chief Creative Officer; Sando Mur, Mathematician and Bellabeat’s cofounder; And also, The Bellabeat marketing analytics team: a team of data analysts responsible for collecting, anayzing, and reporting data.


### Business Task

Now, after getting answers to all of my questions (during the ask phase), I'm able to define clearly the business task which is: To analyse how do Bellabeat customers use their smart devices? And then, Identify potential opportunities for growth and recommendations for the Bellabeat marketing team based on trends in smart device usage.

## Prepare Phase

The CCO encourages me to use public data that explores smart device users’ daily habits. She points you to a specific data set:

- FitBit Fitness Tracker Data (CC0: Public Domain, dataset made available through Mobius): This Kaggle data set
contains personal fitness tracker from thirty fitbit users. Thirty eligible Fitbit users consented to the submission of personal tracker data, including minute-level output for physical activity, heart rate, and sleep monitoring. It includes information about daily activity, steps, and heart rate that can be used to explore users’ habits.

The CCO tells me  that this data set might have some limitations, and encourages me  to consider adding another data to help address those limitations as you begin to work more with this data.

In this phase, I will download and Import the dataset. Then make sure all the data is organized and credible. And I will sort and filter the data. So, here is the link to download the dataset:

   FitBit Fitness Tracker Data :
    https://www.kaggle.com/arashnic/fitbit.

About the dataset:

The dataset was generated by respondents to a distributed survey via Amazon Mechanical Turk between 03.12.2016 and 05.12.2016. And include 18 CSV files.

Now, I'm going to Install some R packages that will help me in my analysis


```{r}
# installing packages

install.packages("tidyverse")
install.packages("lubridate")
install.packages("dplyr")
install.packages("skimr")
install.packages("janitor")
install.packages("tidyr")
install.packages("here")
install.packages("ggplot2")
```

Now, I'm going to load these packages that will help me in my analysis.


```{r}
# loading packages;

library(tidyverse)
library(lubridate)
library(dplyr)
library(skimr)
library(janitor)
library(tidyr)
library(here)
library(ggplot2)
```

### Importing Dataset

Now, I'm going to Import all dataset.

Then VIEW, CLEAN, FORMAT, and ORGANIZE the dataset. After reviewing all the datasets, I decided to work exclusively with the following data for my analysis:


```{r}
DailyActivity <- read.csv("C:/Users/usee/OneDrive/Desktop/Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16/dailyActivity_merged.csv")
DailyCalories <- read.csv("C:/Users/usee/OneDrive/Desktop/Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16/dailyCalories_merged.csv")
DailyIntensities <- read.csv("C:/Users/usee/OneDrive/Desktop/Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16/dailyIntensities_merged.csv")
HeartRateSeconds <- read.csv("C:/Users/usee/OneDrive/Desktop/Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16/heartrate_seconds_merged.csv")
SleepDay <- read.csv("C:/Users/usee/OneDrive/Desktop/Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16/sleepDay_merged.csv")
WeightLog <- read.csv("C:/Users/usee/OneDrive/Desktop/Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16/weightLogInfo_merged.csv")
```

### Getting Looks and Inspect into our Loaded Dataset

One common function we can use to preview our data is the **head() function,** which returns the columns and first several rows of data.


```{r}
head(DailyActivity)
head(DailyCalories)
head(DailyIntensities)
head(HeartRateSeconds)
head(SleepDay)
head(WeightLog)
```

Using **str() functions** to summarize or preview our data frame. the str() function will provide summaries of each column in our data arranged horizontally.

```{r}
str(DailyActivity)
str(DailyCalories)
str(DailyIntensities)
str(HeartRateSeconds)
str(SleepDay)
str(WeightLog)
```

To find out what columns will have in our data frame, we use the **colnames() function**.

```{r}
colnames(DailyActivity)
colnames(DailyCalories)
colnames(DailyIntensities)
colnames(HeartRateSeconds)
colnames(SleepDay)
colnames(WeightLog)
```

## Process Phase

The process phase is to ensure the data is complete clean, organize and can be used for our analysis.

First check for duplicate values in our data, using the sum and duplicated.

```{r}
sum(duplicated(DailyActivity))
sum(duplicated(DailyCalories))
sum(duplicated(DailyIntensities))
sum(duplicated(HeartRateSeconds))
sum(duplicated(SleepDay))
sum(duplicated(WeightLog))
```

Note; 3 duplicates returned for SleepDay data frame, while 0's returned for the remaining data frames

we need to remove duplicates for the SleepDay data frames.

notes; we use unique function to remove duplicates

```{r}
SleepDay <- unique(SleepDay)
```

Now, confirm we no longer have duplicates value.

```{r}
sum(duplicated(SleepDay))
```

Let check for NA Values in our data

```{r}
sum(is.na(DailyActivity))
sum(is.na(DailyCalories))
sum(is.na(DailyIntensities))
sum(is.na(HeartRateSeconds))
sum(is.na(SleepDay))
sum(is.na(WeightLog))
```

we can see that only WeightLog data have NA

Notes: we use **drop_na** to remove NA values. although we see the 5th column *fat* from the WeightLog data contains mostly NA values. in order to preserve data we will first remove the 5th column before using drop.na.

```{r}
WeightLog <- WeightLog[, -5]

WeightLog <- drop_na(WeightLog)
```

let confirm we no longer have any NA values in our WeightLog data.

```{r}
sum(is.na(WeightLog))
```

No more any NA values
 
 
### Change Date Format

I have to ensure consistency across all data columns, I first renamed all date formats to be uniform across all data frames. Then, I used the **trimws function** to remove leading and trailing spaces.

Note: In all our data frames the date columns are Character values. We need them to be date and time values.

 We are going to use *as.Date and  as.POSIXct* to achieve this.


for DailyActivity Data

```{r}
DailyActivity <- DailyActivity %>% mutate(ActivityDate = trimws(ActivityDate)) %>% rename(Date = ActivityDate)

DailyActivity <- DailyActivity %>% mutate(Date = as.Date(Date, format = "%m/%d/%Y"))
```

 *let check*

```{r}
str(DailyActivity)
```

for DailyCalories Data

```{r}
DailyCalories <- DailyCalories %>% mutate(ActivityDay = trimws(ActivityDay)) %>% rename(Date = ActivityDay)

DailyCalories <- DailyCalories %>% mutate(Date = as.Date(Date, format = "%m/%d/%Y"))
```

```{r}
str(DailyCalories)
```

for DailyIntensities Data

```{r}
DailyIntensities <- DailyIntensities %>% mutate(ActivityDay = trimws(ActivityDay)) %>% rename(Date = ActivityDay)

DailyIntensities <- DailyIntensities %>% mutate(Date = as.Date(Date, format = "%m/%d/%Y"))
```

```{r}
str(DailyIntensities)
```

for HeartrateSeconds Data

```{r}
HeartRateSeconds <- HeartRateSeconds %>% mutate(Time = trimws(Time)) %>% rename(Date = Time)

HeartRateSeconds <- HeartRateSeconds %>% mutate(Date = as.POSIXct(Date, format = "%m/%d/%Y %I:%M:%S %p", tz = "UTC"))
```

```{r}
str(HeartRateSeconds)
```

for SleepDay Data


```{r}
SleepDay <- SleepDay %>% mutate(SleepDay = trimws(SleepDay)) %>% rename(Date = SleepDay)

SleepDay <- SleepDay %>% mutate(Date = as.Date(Date, format = "%m/%d/%Y" ))
```

```{r}
str(SleepDay)
```


for WeightLog Data

```{r}
WeightLog <- WeightLog %>% mutate(Date = trimws(Date))

WeightLog <- WeightLog %>% mutate(Date = as.POSIXct(Date, format = "%m/%d/%Y %I:%M:%S %p", tz = "UTC"))
```

```{r}
str(WeightLog)
```


## Analyze Phase


Now that all the data is well organized and prepared for analysis, I start putting it to work. 

First up, let's examine the total number of participants in each dataset. 

Then, I can start exploring and analyzing the dataset in detail.

```{r}
# For each Participants

n_distinct(DailyActivity$Id)
n_distinct(DailyCalories$Id)
n_distinct(DailyIntensities$Id)
n_distinct(HeartRateSeconds$Id)
n_distinct(SleepDay$Id)
n_distinct(WeightLog$Id)
```

we can see, There are 33 participants in the DailyActivity, DailyCalories, and DailyIntensities datasets, 24 participants in the SleepDay dataset, 14 participants in the HeartRateSeconds dataset, and only 8 participants in the WeightLog dataset.

Therefore, I will focus my analysis on the DailyActivity, DailyCalories, DailyIntensities, HeartRateSeconds, and SleepDay datasets.


Here are some quick summary statistics about each data frame.

```{r}
# Summary statistics for Daily activity

summary(DailyActivity)
```

```{r}
# Summary statistics for Daily Calories

summary(DailyCalories)
```

```{r}
# Summary statistics for Daily Intensities

summary(DailyIntensities)
```

```{r}
# Summary statistics for Heart Rate Seconds

summary(HeartRateSeconds)
```

```{r}
# Summary statistics for Sleep Day

summary(SleepDay)
```


#### Key finding from my statistics summary

- **Activity Levels:** There is significant variability in daily steps, distance, and calories burned, indicating inconsistent activity patterns among participants.

- **High Sedentary Time:** Participants generally spend a large amount of time inactive, pointing to the need for interventions to increase daily physical activity.

- **Intensity of Activity:** There is a mix of activity intensities, with fewer participants engaging in high-intensity activities regularly.

- **Heart Rate:** Heart rate data shows periods of activity and rest, reflecting varied cardiovascular activities among participants.

- **Sleep Patterns:** Sleep data reveals inconsistencies in sleep duration and efficiency, with many participants not achieving optimal sleep regularly.


## Share and Act Phases

let visualize some key explorations



#### average steps user take per day

```{r}
# Calculate average steps per day

avg_steps_per_day <- DailyActivity %>% group_by(Date) %>% summarise(avg_steps = mean(TotalSteps))

view(avg_steps_per_day)
```

```{r}
# Plot average steps per day

ggplot(avg_steps_per_day, aes(x = Date, y= avg_steps)) + geom_line() + geom_smooth() + labs(title = "Average Steps per Day")
```

I can see the average steps per day reveals that user activity levels are variable daily but show a positive overall trend. The trend line's upward slope suggests that Bellabeat's strategies to encourage more activity are effective over time. this will helps Bellabeat to further enhance user engagement and maintain or increase activity levels through targeted interventions.


#### Relationship between TotalSteps and Calories

 how the number of steps taken each day correlates with the calories burned.

```{r}
# plot correlation between Steps vs. Calories Burned

ggplot(DailyActivity, aes(x = TotalSteps, y = Calories)) + geom_point() + geom_smooth() + labs(title =  "Correlation Between Total Steps and Calories Burned")
```

we can see the correlation between total steps and calories burned reveals a clear positive correlation. This indicates that as the number of steps taken increases, the calories burned also tend to increase. The trend line confirms this positive relationship, showing an upward slope.


#### Heart Rate per Minutes

```{r}
# Average heart rate per minute

avg_heart_rate_per_minutes <- HeartRateSeconds %>% group_by(Time = floor_date(Date, "minute")) %>% summarise(avg_heartrate = mean(Value))

view(avg_heart_rate_per_minutes)
```

```{r}
# Plot average heart rate per minute

ggplot(avg_heart_rate_per_minutes, aes(x = Time, y = avg_heartrate)) + geom_line() + geom_smooth() + labs(title = "Average Heart Rate per Minute")
```

This shows regular peaks in heart rate during the morning and evening, suggesting that users engage in higher levels of physical activity during these times, likely due to exercise routines or other daily activities. this also indicates a slight upward trend in the average heart rate over time, suggesting an overall increase in activity levels or potentially elevated stress levels.


#### Total sleep time per day

```{r}
# calculate total sleep time per day

total_sleep_per_day <- SleepDay %>% group_by(Date) %>% summarise(total_sleep = sum(TotalMinutesAsleep))

view(total_sleep_per_day)
```

#### Plot total sleep time per day

```{r}
ggplot(total_sleep_per_day, aes(x = Date, y = total_sleep)) + geom_line() + geom_smooth() + labs(title = "Total Sleep Time per Day")
```

we can see that this reveals significant daily fluctuations in total sleep time, indicating that users do not have consistent sleep durations. This shows an overall downward trend in sleep time. This indicates that users have experiencing a gradual reduction in the amount of sleep they get each night.


#### the correlation between Total Minutes As Sleep and Total Time In Bed

```{r}
correlation <- cor(SleepDay$TotalMinutesAsleep, SleepDay$TotalTimeInBed, use = "complete.obs")
correlation
```

#### Visualize the correlation

```{r}
ggplot(SleepDay, aes(x = TotalTimeInBed, y = TotalMinutesAsleep)) +geom_point() + geom_smooth() + labs(title = "Correlation Between Time in Bed and Time Asleep", round(correlation, 2))
```

This  reveal a strong positive relationship between the total time users spend in bed and the total minutes they spend asleep. this also indicates that users who allocate more time for sleep by spending more time in bed are likely to achieve longer sleep durations.


####  Relationship Between Daily Activity and Sleep Quality

how daily activity levels (steps, distance, calories burned) relate to sleep quality (total sleep minutes, sleep efficiency)

#### firstly, let merge Daily Activity data and Sleep Day data

```{r}
# Merge datasets by date and user ID

merge_data <- DailyActivity %>% inner_join(SleepDay, by = c("Id", "Date"))

view(merge_data)
```

#### Plotting Total Steps vs. Total Minutes Asleep

```{r}
ggplot(merge_data, aes(x = TotalSteps, y = TotalMinutesAsleep)) + geom_point() + geom_smooth() + labs(title = "Daily Steps vs. Total Minutes Asleep")
```

This shows that on days when users take more steps, they tend to sleep more. The trend line shows that as the number of steps increases, the total minutes of sleep also tend to increase, indicating that higher levels of physical activity during the day might contribute to better sleep duration.

#### Plotting Calories Burned vs. Sleep Efficiency

```{r}
merge_data <- merge_data %>% mutate(SleepEfficiency = (TotalMinutesAsleep / TotalTimeInBed) * 100)


ggplot(merge_data, aes(x = Calories, y = SleepEfficiency)) + geom_point() + geom_smooth() + labs(title = "Calories Burned vs. Sleep Efficiency")
```

this reveals a positive relationship between calories burned and sleep efficiency. As the number of calories burned increases, sleep efficiency tends to improve. This suggests that higher levels of physical activity, which result in more calories being burned, are associated with more efficient sleep.



## Conclusion

after analysis the datasets and trends from our visualization, we can conclude that, The analysis of Bellabeat data reveals that increasing daily physical activity positively impacts both calorie expenditure and sleep quality. Users who take more steps and burn more calories tend to have longer and more efficient sleep. The average steps per day show an upward trend, indicating successful engagement strategies. However, sleep patterns are inconsistent, with a general decline in total sleep time, suggesting the need for improved sleep hygiene. Peaks in heart rate during mornings and evenings point to routine physical activity, though a slight overall increase in heart rate may indicate elevated stress levels. These insights emphasize the benefits of physical activity for enhancing fitness and sleep while highlighting areas for improving users' sleep habits.


## Recommendation 

Based on the detailed analysis of Bellabeat's FitBit Fitness Tracker data, several actionable recommendations can be made to enhance user engagement, improve health outcomes, and promote overall well-being. The insights derived from the data provide a strong foundation for these recommendations.

1. **Promote Physical Activity:** To Continue and enhance strategies that encourage users to increase their daily steps. Introducing step challenges, offering rewards for milestones, and providing personalized activity goals that can further motivate users to stay active.

2. **Enhance Sleep Hygiene:** Provide educational resources and personalized recommendations to help users improve their sleep habits. Emphasizing the importance of consistent sleep schedules and sufficient time in bed can be beneficial.

3. **Monitor Heart Rate:** Regularly track heart rate patterns to gain insights into users' activity levels and cardiovascular health. Use this data to provide personalized feedback and recommendations.

4. **Targeted Interventions:** Develop targeted interventions to maintain or increase user engagement. These could include challenges, reminders, and motivational content to encourage users to stay active and prioritize their sleep.

5. **Offer Holistic Health Insights:** Provide holistic health insights that combine heart rate, activity, and sleep data. Help users understand how different aspects of their daily routine affect their overall well-being.

6. **Combine Activity and Sleep Data:** Integrate activity and sleep data in the app to provide a comprehensive view of health. Create dashboards that show how daily activities impact sleep and vice versa.

Implementing these recommendations will enable Bellabeat to utilize data analysis insights to boost user engagement, improve health outcomes, and offer a more personalized and effective user experience. These strategies will help users reach their fitness and wellness goals while solidifying Bellabeat's reputation as a leader in health and fitness technology.



 - I would appreciate any comments and recommendations for improvement!!!




















































